# 10 March 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

Attendees:

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Mihai Nita \- Google (MIH)  
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJSF (RGN)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)  
- Ujjwal Sharma \- Igalia (USA)  
- Mark Davis \- Google (MED) \[10-10:30 PT\]


**Scribe:**   USA

## Topic: Info Share, Project Planning

Chair: changes to repo, labels, feedback template for post-47

APP: Repo has been updated to be ready for release, it says we’re “stable”. In the course of doing that, changed the issue template to be feedback focused instead. Started to label things as feedback appropriately.

## Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#1057 | Fix markup examples to show that literals work normally | Merge |
| \#1056 | @can-copy can copy | Merge |
| \#1054 | Make option resolution return something if rv is a fallback value | Discuss |
| \#1050 | Drop tests relying on u:locale | Discuss |
| \#1048 | Fix select tests to not presume fallback for formatting | Merge |
| \#1011 | Require prioritizing syntax and data model errors | Discuss |

### \#1057

APP: *talks about the PR briefly.* Any objections?  
*No objections*

### \#1056

APP: Also editorial, any comments?  
None, on track to merge.

### \#1054

APP: Spelled out of a comment from TAG earlier. Changed the approach due to feedback from EAO. While doing the fix uncovered an editorial oversight with the options value not being highlighted appropriately. Had a question: if you look at the option resolution, it takes a placeholder and everything is added to a map of options. The operand might also have some options on it according to the text. It seems odd I can’t seem to remember why.  
RGN: Remember us having this discussion but not the conclusion.  
APP: This is something we should write down now. We should add a note clarifying this, we should make an option … and merge this, do we all agree?  
RGN: Had EAO weighed in on this?  
APP: Not on this issue specifically.  
RGN: Can we wait until the next meeting then?  
MIH: We can let the functions make the decision. This might depend on each function. The fallbacks can also be decent values. Some format values for options make sense and we should include them.  
APP: What this means is that for unresolved option values it won’t put the option value in the list. The default would indeed kick in in this case, which seems fine. My concern is: we could have a set of options that are actually there in the operand and another in the placeholder. One would assume the local values would override ones in the operand. Why don’t we do that work for the function then. Or do we think the function should be responsible for it.  
USA: We should stick to that override unless we have a strong use case for the opposite.  
APP: Agreed, from a developer’s POV the override behavior makes sense anyway.  
MIH: It makes sense that the last one should override the previous one. What happens when the local value is actually invalid.  
APP: Same thing as what happens here: it doesn’t do anything.  
MIH: How does it deal with the original in the map?  
APP: It should keep the original in the map because this makes no change to the map.  
MIH: Makes sense, should probably be explicit about this.

### \#1050

APP: We should develop tests that are required. There should be a distinction between optional and mandatory bits. You should be able to have high conformance even if you don’t implement some optional features. There are two dimensions: whether the thing being tested is optional or if the thing is draft or not.  
MIH: Yeah, I think I wouldn’t submit this. This is about markup. We should keep `u:locale` to markup. It would be wrong to ban them altogether. It feels random at the moment because it may or may not be an error. We fiddle with it when we don’t know that yet.  
APP: My suggestion is we should add some statuses to schema instead of doing this. Any concerns?  
MIH: I can modify the schema. Should I do something like an enum?  
APP: Something like the testing alternative to “status: draft”.

### \#1048

APP: Any objections?  
None raised.  
MIH: I wonder why we have them in the first place. Doesn’t make a lot of sense.

### \#1011

APP: When I look at the discussion we had with Shane, EAO made a list of optional stuff and this one jumps out as sort of “advisory” to the implementers.  
MIH: If you have syntax error, you cannot go from there to any other kind of errors.  
APP: Any concerns against this change?  
None raised.

## Topic: Rechartering and Goals (\#1051)

*We need to set goals for the working group since we’ve partly or wholly disposed of the ones we had.*  
[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/1051](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/1051)

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md)

MED: Presents draft  
MIH: If you want I have code doing that, normalizing the partial select to the \<...\> select. The only limitation you have is that if you have two plurals with offsets and both of them use the \# sign. If I have offsets I can’t merge them into the same message. Anyhow I have code that does this combining.  
APP: I guess my hesitation is that we have things that are inside the \<...\> I see the migration tool as something this group doesn’t have to do in order to be successful but we should promote these tools and focus on the sets of things that we believe would be more useful. I believe we should finish all the MF1 functions and then finish the MF2 draft functions. I think documentation and proselytization of this is important.  
MED:  
APP: I think the difference is that I’m not so much concerned about the migration. I’m concerned about “you should be able to write a message in MF2 that can do the same things in MF1”. But we assume that you’d map between these themselves.  
MED: We need to point people to the right thing.  
APP: Should we make a PR for that?  
MED: Short term goal’s for the 48\.

## Topic: W3C TAG Review

*The W3C TAG has not quite officially completed their review, but the proto-comments are present. Let’s review and respond.*  
[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/1052](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/1052)

APP: The TAG reviewer went into detail regarding the formatting but we’re not making any specific guidelines wrt that, we just have the message syntax.  
MED: Maybe we can make a note about that, mentioning the “preferred” format.

## Topic: Development, Deployment, and Maintenance of the former “messageformat.dev” (\#1043)

*[Luca Casonato](mailto:hello@lcas.dev) kindly donated the documentation site to Unicode. We need to start planning how to maintain, deploy, and manage it.*

APP: Luca gave us this website, we need a plan for maintenance. The immediate concern is where we should deploy this. This might be a CLDR TC discussion. Sounds like **messageformat.unicode.org**  
MED: We should make a recommendation to the TC for best results. Your recommendation sounds great to me.  
SFC: I thought we had messageformat.dev  
MED: It is atm, we should connect it to unicode somehow.  
SFC: Prefer messageformat.dev but if we want to change this, we can.  
MED: We need to highlight our ownership of this website by putting it on unicode.  
APP: We can keep messageformat.dev until it needs to be renewed.  
USA: Like your idea, the only improvement I can suggest is mf2.unicode.org  
Matt R: I like messageformat, we don’t expect messageformat 3 anytime soon, right?  
MED: MF2 is named as such to help distinguish it from the existing MF, but we’re just *the* messageformat standard otherwise.  
APP: Several of you helped create this material, would any of you volunteer to maintain it? Should we subsume this into our process?  
MED: We should.  
APP: Alright, I’ll start working on this then.

## Topic: Issue review

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 40 open (was 39 last time).

* 0 are tagged for 47  
* 25 are tagged for 48  
* 2 are tagged “Seek-Feedback-in-Preview”  
* 5 are tagged “Future”  
* 15 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 1 is tagged Feedback  
* 2 are `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 4 are `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion (see below)  
* 0 are ballots

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#1052 | \[FEEDBACK\] TAG Review | Discuss |
| \#1051 | Plans for v48 | Discuss |
| \#1043 | Deployment, Development, and Maintenance of “messageformat.dev” | Discuss |
| \#866 | CLDR semantic datetime skeleton spec is nearly ready and MF2 should use it | Discuss (next week) |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

We should review the “seek-feedback-in-preview” and “future” items.

